So the military were coming and Mrs. Manick had advised, you know, just keep quiet, stay in the back room,
because mum didn't know what to do or how to handle the situation.
She phoned around incessantly and not a single person, not a single male out of all the extended family,
everybody who'd worked with dad, like four or five cousins who'd worked with dad,
Suru, my brother, he was only in town miles away, didn't want to come to be with his sisters or his mother,
and everybody was too frightened to come, so it was fine for a widow to handle it all herself with two small children.
So as Mrs. Manick had said, all the curtains were drawn, so we had to pretend we were actually, we'd left the country already,
but you didn't know who they'd be asking and if somebody had said that, oh no, they haven't left, they're still here,
because all the Asians lived on that street, so people knew who had left and who was going or who hadn't yet left,
so we were petrified on many accounts really.
And as Mrs. Manick had said, sit in the back bedroom, and there was an alleyway along the back bedroom,
don't go in the front bedroom because you might make a noise or they might, you know, if they smash a window or whatever, they could see you.
So we sat silently on the floor, we couldn't sleep, and my sister put her head on my mother's lap and she fell asleep,
she was only small then, four years difference, and I just sat cross-legged on the floor with,
because we didn't want to sit on the beds or anything in case we creaked or made a noise,
so we were on the floor and the only person that my mum could get to come to spend the night was her friend from the temple,
Mrs. Jadao, so she came and she stayed the night and she said, I'll come, so we were just so relieved somebody was there,
otherwise mum would have been with just us two, so every single door was bolted, locked, and we sat there silently,
and then we could hear the military and the feet crunching next door, and they were banging on Mrs. Manick's house next door,
and she was an educated woman who could handle herself, but as soon as mum heard that,
and there was noise and a lot of shouting going on, she jumped up and I didn't know what she was going to do,
and then she ran through the back bedroom, opening doors as she went, and she ran into the lounge,
and we were all running behind us following her, I didn't know what the hell was going on,
then she opened the lounge door and as soon as she'd opened that, she was at the front door of our house,
and there was also a curfew on, so anybody who is out after the curfew time, I can't remember,
but after six or so could be shot, so you weren't allowed to go out on the streets,
and she reached the front door and she was reaching the stop and she started to shout,
because she wanted to protect Mrs. Manick next door, because Mrs. Manick had been such a good friend to us,
and she started to shout, I'm coming, I'm coming, I just didn't know what to do, and I was literally ten,
and I literally just reached up and I closed her mouth up to get her to shut up,
and my mum was a large woman, so it was like literally reaching all the way up as a ten year old,
to close her mouth up and dragging her back, and Mrs. Jedow, the lady who'd come to spend the night with us,
looking back it was so unfair on her to be put in that position, so she just stood there with her palms pressed,
begging my mum, not saying a word, she was doing this pressing palm, you know, as in please, please, I beg you, I beg you,
and my sister was looking at me, and I couldn't actually hold my hand up and keep my mum's mouth shut to stop her shouting,
and push her back, and I just hadn't got the, I was trying to push her back, but she was fighting and resisting me,
so I said to my sister, drag her left foot, you know, drag her foot back, so my sister bent down and used all her might to try and drag her foot back,
and I said to, I was literally directing the operation, and I said to Mrs. Jedow, you know, lock that door, quietly lock that door up,
and literally I was pushing my mother back, and then as we went through the inner door, I said to, you know, Mrs. Jedow, close that door,
and finally got mum back into the back room, and Mrs. Jedow was saying to her, I beg you sister, I beg you, I beg you,
and I just couldn't trust mum then to not shout, so I just kept my mouth on her, my hand on her mouth,
and I was desperate to go to the loo, but just didn't go, didn't do anything, and we didn't sleep, and my mother was using her prayer beads then,
and Mrs. Jedow said, just keep praying, just keep praying, and she kept saying, what about Mrs. Manek, Mrs. Manek, you know,
so then Mrs. Jedow was saying, well God is with her, God is with her, and the crunch came to our alleyway,
where they were looking at the back bedroom, and the military were just outside our back bedroom,
because you could hear the crunch on the gravel there where the papaya tree was, and they were banging and shouting, but we just kept quiet after that,
and fortunately they wouldn't have heard, because they had all gone into Mrs. Manek's house, and they were harassing and wanting wads of money,
so they took a wad of money, but that was already prepared anyway, and then fortunately it was such a relief when morning came,
and we could go to the loo, and it seemed like normality had returned, and then everybody was comparing notes,
as in what happened to you, did they harass you, how much did you give them, and people were saying we didn't care,
we just gave them a wad of money to go away, and they would all share it out amongst themselves then,
and then the next day over the wall, you know, I was so upset with Mum really, so I said to Mrs. Manek,
she literally flew the door open, and she was coming to help you and rescue, so Mrs. Manek said,
you'd have been shot if you'd stepped outside, what are you doing, you should be thinking of your daughters,
so Mrs. Manek's mum said, well I was thinking of you, you are on your own, you're a widow on your own,
so Mrs. Manek said, yes, but you know, I can handle myself, I'm educated, I know what they wanted, they wanted the money,
you know, I gave them loads of money, they went away then, and I said, you know, I literally had to force my mother back,
and she actually told my mum off, and I was really pleased about that as a ten-year-old,
because I thought you deserved to be told off, Mum, and you know, you're just happy with little victories as a ten-year-old,
because she wouldn't listen to me, but of course the headmistress telling her off, that was a different matter,
and many, many years later when Mum was settled in Leicester eventually, Mrs. Manek actually came to visit her,
and I spoke with her on the phone, because I was working in Wales then, but you know, it was lovely that she remembered Mum,
and so that was one of the most terrifying nights of our lives, and none of the relatives really asked many questions,
nobody was bothered, the attitude was, well, you were all right, weren't you?
Was it commonplace that the military was coming even before all the talk around the expulsion?
Yes, yeah, they were doing the rounds, and the military were doing the rounds before the expulsion,
because they wanted to extract money, threaten frightened people, they were given a lot of power to harass, bully,
because EDI means rhetoric, had been the Asians are ruling the country, and you're the Africans who actually own the country,
you know, why are you being treated like that, why are you being employed in hotels, and what have you, and cleaning,
and what have you, and it's your country, you know, why aren't you running the pharmacies, and the hospitals, and the businesses,
so this was the rhetoric which was all about stirring up negativity and hatred, because a lot of the people,
a lot of the Africans when the Asians were leaving were saying, what are we going to do now,
because obviously there was no employment or nothing there, then the infrastructure just collapsed, and AIDS was rife,
and AIDS just ripped the country apart then, so that was all happening,
it was really frightening, scary, and the visitors we'd had, the amount of, as you know, with Indian families,
the hospitality is second to none really, so if anybody comes to your house, the thinking is,
these could be gods and goddesses coming, so you must feed people properly, and look after people,
which is how I was brought up actually, so where the visitors were always, the cousins were always in and out,
and mum would cook samosas, or homemade popadoms, or everything, homemade chutneys and pickles,
and the store cupboard was full of ingredients, all in SMA tins, baby powder milk tins,
and mum would say, I saved all this, this is what you and your sister drunk, you know, you drunk so much SMA,
so she had all of them, it was like a wonderful memory for her to store all the ingredients in SMA tins,
and now, after dad died, there were very few visitors, and if we wanted anybody to come,
it would be a case of celebrate, like my birthday for example, and that's when the company would come,
you know, things are laid on, people would come then, and the kids would enjoy all the birthdays and what have you,
so we'd do things like that, but apart from that, there wasn't the jollity and people coming and going like there had been,
so it had become quieter, unless mum said, I'm celebrating Marley's birthday or whatever,
so then the expulsion came, and it was three months you have to leave, and we just didn't believe it,
and mum was talking around with all the neighbours, because she didn't really watch the news,
my dad would have been the person who would have known what to do,
and meanwhile, my dad had always said, we've got to invest outside of Uganda as well, we can't just keep all our wealth here,
so he had actually bought a house in Chiswick in London, but it was under my younger brother's name, Ratilal's name,
because if anything ever happens, you make sure you look after your mother and sisters,
and he'd always said, yes of course he would, and so that house was in Ivy Crescent in Chiswick,
and what happened then was that there was talks about, are we going to be getting rid of the Ugandan Asians and expulsion,
and we just didn't believe it, until people started to leave and people on Bukota Street were leaving,
and it was, we just didn't know what to do, because mum didn't know how to get any travel tickets,
and the only way you could get a travel ticket, the bank accounts were frozen apart from one way travel fare you could get,
to just leave the country, the rest of the money the banks were going to have,
so it really, dad had been right, it was better to get money out of the country,
and the other thing he'd done for many years was if anybody was going to India for example,
we had a joint family bank account, and that was under the name of my older brother, Suru,
so all the family jewellery and gold were all in there, including mum's gold, which there was plenty of pieces there,
so one of the pieces I remember she very fondly talked about was a gold solid chain,
and it wasn't nine carat, it would be like 22 carat really good gold,
and she said, dad had always said you're my little goddess, so this chain as you can see on that chain for example,
on that Krishna statue, the chain goes all the way down to the floor,
and she would have to wrap it round and round her neck about six times, she had that, she had like,
I don't know if you know the name Skandoro, which is like a hook here and a hook there,
and it would be on her sari and she had lots of layers in it, she had rings with a disc on her front arm with a bracelet,
then that would attach so every finger would have a ring and then a gold disc and then a bracelet,
and she had armlets, she had beautiful jewellery and brooches and all sorts of things,
and that was all under one family name, because people, we lived in extended families,
so it was quite normal to have your investments together, so it would be why have two or three safe deposit boxes,
because everybody trusted each other, and there was this old fashioned honour about it,
but of course only until your father is alive of course, has to be said,
and my brother had always promised he would look after us, and he'd already, he was already in London by then anyway,
and then people were leaving Uganda, so we didn't know how to even catch a plane, what to do,
and my mother kept ringing Rathilal, who was in Rathu, who was in London, asking what do we do, what do we do,
and he just said, oh just come with one of the relatives was coming, Suresh, one of the cousins was flying,
fly back with them, fly with them then, so we packed up about seven parcels, great big boxes,
which were well about as high as well, I could just about reach into the box, and we packed,
and my mother had quilts made, because she'd heard it's cold in Britain, so all these quilts were made,
and I wanted to pack Mary, my African doll, I remember that, because I used to polish my carved African wooden doll,
a head and shoulders with all the ringlets and curls in her hair, and I packed my school books,
because they were the most precious to me, and we packed seven big boxes, and everything was sent off,
and then we were coming with Suresh, and we packed the house up, we locked everything away,
although it was no use to us now, because we weren't going to live there again, and it was serious,
people were leaving, and it wasn't a joke, because people, the first time it was announced,
people were just laughing and joking on Bukota Street, saying it's a joke, he doesn't mean it,
you know, he can't just destroy all the business in the country and the banks and what have you,
but yes he did mean it, he was, the EDM was totally unhinged, so when people were leaving,
we also decided we can't really, we've got no other choice, so we left, and in October 72,
and we went, we came with my cousin Suresh, and when we got to the airport, the suitcases were being opened,
and I'm so glad my cousin Suresh, which was the one side of the family we were close to,
because actually we had no businesses with his dad, and he was the son of my uncle I used to call Cacu,
because I couldn't say his full name properly, so I used to call him Cacu Kaka, because I couldn't say it properly,
and he said they will be opening your suitcases, because he knew what was going on,
and he said to have wads of money ready in the suitcase, because once they find the wads of money,
they won't go through everything else, and also he also advised, we all had, the girls also had to have wads of money,
tucked, just peeping out, so we, my sister and I both had 20 shillings each, peeping out,
and this African woman who was just bullying, throwing her weight around at the airport,
was just collecting the money, and you know, you can see how exciting it must have been,
they'd never held that sort of money in their hands, and she was like walking around with great big bunches of money,
and the suitcases were being opened, and the wads of money were being confiscated,
and there were checkpoints going to the airport, and you literally had to do what you were told,
you know, there was people with guns, and if they told you they want this, or they want that,
there was no fighting, you just gave it to them, because you know, you wouldn't argue,
and that could even happen with people, they could say I want that person, you know,
it was extremely frightening, so we just sat quietly, and we got to the airport,
but I remember thinking even as a child, I don't think I could have coped with that,
if it hadn't have been for going with the cousin, because how was I going to get mum to cooperate with me,
you know, because she had her own mind, she was strong-willed, and she always thought, well, God will protect me,
but of course, I used to say to her, well, God can't protect you, because he's too busy doing other things,
you know, he can't do everything for you, mum, you keep saying God will do this, God will do that, you know,
anyway, we eventually got on the plane with our cases, and my sister, funnily enough,
had been wearing a little bracelet with little bells on it, and it was a gold bracelet, it was a child bracelet,
and somehow, as she fell asleep, I think the man next to her, we suspected he took it off,
because when she got off at, when we got off at Stansted, she didn't have it on her,
so we arrived in Stansted, and they were asking us how many cases we had, and what have you,
so I literally counted my family, and I said one, two, three, my sister, my mum, and me,
my English wasn't fantastic, and I just pointed to the cases, and I said one, two, three, you know,
and we got through, and then all the buses were leaving for refugee camp,
and mum just wouldn't leave the airport, she said no, I've got a house in Chiswick, my son's got a house in Chiswick,
you know, he'll pick us up, he'll pick us up, and mum had warned him we were coming, and the flight, and what have you,
and he'd been quite negative about it all, he just said go wherever your cousin goes,
knowing full well my cousin was who we came with, Suresh was going to go into a refugee camp,
because they didn't have any properties here, and my mum kept pumping in two pence,
two pence in the phone box at Stansted airport, as in we're here, we're here, are you coming, are you coming,
and my brother just kept saying no, no space for you, you go in the refugee camp, there's no space for you,
because he said all the other cousins who'd arrived first were all there, and there's nothing for you, nothing for you,
so my mum was quite dazed actually by then, and she wasn't right, and in the end the airport had emptied,
because all the other people had climbed on the buses to go to the Marsfield refugee camp,
and I was like trying to pull my mum as in we can't stay at the airport, come on mum, we can't stay at the airport,
and she just wasn't having it, and I have a house, my son has a house, my husband, you know,
had made sure my son has a house, Ratilal has a house in Chiswick, and I just didn't know what to do really,
you know, I'm aged 11 now, I'm trying to take responsibility for my family, and I just, I honestly didn't know what to do,
and then Suresh came back fortunately, my cousin, and all his family were on the buses,
and he literally turned round to mum and said, are you coming or not, and I was like, come on mum, come on mum, please, please mum,
so eventually we got on the bus, we were all split up, because wherever there was a seat we had to sit there,
and we all arrived in Marsfield, which is quite close to Brighton, in this refugee camp,
and I felt comforted because we were still with our cousins who I'd grown up with, and it was a part of the family,
we were close to my kakukaka's family because we had no businesses, so there was nothing to cheat or take,
and it was a bit of a struggle then, so we were sleeping in dormitories, it was like an army barracks,
and it had outside toilets as well, but I felt, well, we're all together, you know, at least when my cousins are here,
we're all together, and it was like 30 or so beds in a dormitory, but we were all together,
and we were given clothes, and people were saying, oh, come and have whatever clothes you want,
so there were classes to go to, English classes, language classes, so I went and fetched clothes for us,
for my sister and myself, and my mum wouldn't obviously wear it, she'd always wear a sari,
but I got her a cardigan and anything warm, and I remember I found, it had a label on it,
not that I understood much about label, but I found white shoes, and I was quite interested in how things look,
and I'm still interested in fashion even now, you know, I like clothes, and I saw these plasticky socks,
but it said Mary Quant on it, and I remember thinking, oh, that sounds like a nice name,
not knowing what, that it was a design or what it meant, and I thought, oh, if I wear that,
it was like a plastic shine on it, with my white shoes, it would look like I've got boots on,
and I'd always wanted like, you know, I thought boots was like the height of fashion,
and we didn't have boots obviously in Africa, so we were given several clothes, you know, pieces of clothing,
cardis and what have you, and we were going to school, and mum insisted she was going to start learning English,
and a lot of people her age weren't bothered because they were saying, we've got the children who learn English,
and mum was always saying, I've got to learn, I've got two small children, I've got to learn English,
and I remember looking at, the food was absolutely awful compared to what we were used to,
and it was just bland carrots with a bit of oil or butter on them, and I remember thinking and saying to my mum,
who was quite looking really dazed, and she was not well anyway with her diabetes,
but I remember saying to her, oh, look mum, with these carrots on a plate, if you run it round and back and forth,
it was just watery carrots with a bit of oil, the oils were making bigger droplets,
and if you shook it hard, they would split apart, and so I was showing her this phenomena really,
which I thought was incredibly amazing, you know, as a child, it was like, and I was showing it to my sister,
look at the blobs, you know, that the oil makes and what have you, I didn't know why the oily water was doing that,
and mum was just so sort of dazed, and it was like, yes, yes, okay, okay, and it's only now I look back,
and I realise there was me talking to her about these strange things I was hearing,
and there was an English man who didn't speak any Hindi, but the queue was taking too long,
and he would just shout every now and then, jaldi, jaldi, as in hurry up, hurry up, you know, this blonde, blonde 25-year-old,
so I would laugh at his accent, you know, and I'd say to mum, it's not jaldi, jaldi, is it, it's jaldi, jaldi, you know,
so she'd be like, yeah, okay, and anyway, she wasn't eating much, and I'd say, come on, mum, you've got to eat something,
because the food was absolutely dreadful, and then there was a night where I think the men got together and said,
we'll cook a meal, you know, we'll cook, because we're not used to just boiled potatoes and boiled carrots,
and a lot of us were vegetarian as well, and I think they were doing boiled chicken of some sort,
it looked like a boiled chicken, not that I'm an expert on chicken, and anyway, that day when they cooked a meal
with proper spices and they managed to acquire food, we just talked about it for days, it was such lovely food,
what we were used to, you know, proper tempered spices and what we call proper food, this was proper food,
and that was like one of the highlights, and then another highlight was they did a trip to take us to Brighton to watch the dolphins,
and the dolphins are no longer there, but I've been recently to Brighton to film it, and I remember exactly where we were,
we went through, it was near the sea front, and we saw these dolphins, you know, that they were jumping through hoops,
and there were all these tricks being played, and that was magical, but not as magical as one time we went to see a film,
a Bollywood film that took us to see a Bollywood film with Rajesh Khanna in it, and I'd always liked Rajesh Khanna,
and we went to see that and people were just comparing notes, you know, which was the highlight, the dolphins or the film,
but to hear Hindi being spoken, it was just so magical, and we were used to going to the pictures on a Sunday,
so we all more or less voted, the kids amongst us saying, oh no, no, the film was the best,
and then people were being housed, but we were told you can't go to Leicester, where mum wanted to go because her brother was there,
and we were there in the refugee camp three months, and mum was starting, mum was learning English, going to classes,
and we were doing school, but I still felt with our families, extended families, the family that we were always close to,
so it always felt wonderful and magical, and people were being, moving away now to being housed here, there and wherever,
but we were given a list, you can go to Peterborough, we were given these cities we'd never heard of,
because we'd only ever heard of London and Leicester, but you can't go to London, you can't go to Leicester,
because there's too many of you there, so mum couldn't get to Leicester, where her brother was,
but the thing was, because my uncle, my uncle Purshottam was in Fullwood at that time in Sheffield,
and he was my dad's trustee, my dad's older brother, so he was the trustee with another person called Odujee Kurji,
it was honourable to follow your husband's family, if you go to your own family in Leicester, like her brother,
it would be like the widow's gone home, so there's a lot of dishonour in that as well,
like, oh are you trying to say that your husband's family are not capable of looking after you, so there's this sort of stigma,
so we went to a place called Chapeltown, where there was a church minister, which is not far from Sheffield,
but nevertheless we felt, well it is still family, we'll follow them, they'll still be in Sheffield,
so we found, well they found us I should say, this church minister said he was happy to house a small family,
and he had one room in the manse in Chapeltown, Methodist church, and so we were shipped over there,
so we went on the train there and he came to pick us up, David Blanchflower, his name was Methodist minister,
and we were very separated then from everybody really, and we lived in this one room in the manse,
it was very very difficult with everything cooking, and of course they were eating meat,
and it was always fish Friday, and if you're not used to the smells, it was really quite dreadful smells and things,
because if you're not used to it on a Friday, and my mum with being so devout found it extremely difficult,
and it would always be, oh my god Friday's coming again, it'll be fish Friday, you know,
but nevertheless they gave us one room and they weren't taking any money off us, but they were including us girls in everything,
so we were included in this, Christmas came and we were included in the Christmas choirs,
it was lovely and we were, you know, came across Silent Night, Holy Night, it was such a beautiful hymn,
and we were given candles to hold and we were part of the procession, so it felt incredibly special,
and my mum continued to learn English as well there, and we'd get out for walks, we'd go to the market at the bottom of the hill,
and we worked out that if we went towards the end of the day, because the only money we had was benefit money then,
that the fruit and things could often get reduced, so we worked that out, so that's what we would do,
and I found a coat, an Auntie Jen, Auntie Jennifer Blanchflower, the wife, she found me the coat actually,
a yellow coat, and an Anorak Reduced, so they bought that for me, and they were lovely people,
and, but it was extremely difficult as well, because mum wanted to make dokris, you know, the dokras,
and of course that has to ferment, and probably they felt that smelled to them,
and they didn't like it fermenting and bubbling, you know, and the smell that made, and of course curries and sags and spices weren't that popular,
the love affair hadn't yet started with spicy curries and that sort of food,
so there was a bit of a, a bit difficult in both ways really, you could understand it from both points of views,
and I went to Ecclesfield School then, and I would catch my bus, but Auntie Jean would take my sister to the primary school across the road there then,
and then nine months came and went, there was a family, Indian family in High Green, which wasn't that far,
so we used to visit them, and then we'd go and get on the bus and visit the family in Sheffield,
and it was always us oftentimes who went to visit, because if we wanted company, we would have to catch the buses and go,
you know, and obviously Mum was isolated, we were at school, and by this time my English was getting better and better,
although I was still having problems, because I'd say things like, what time are you, to my friend Andrea Eastwood,
what time are you getting on the bus, and she used to say, you don't say it like that, you say, what time are you catching the bus, you know,
and I said, you don't catch a bus, because you can't catch a bus if it's thrown at you,
and so she used to get fed up with me, because obviously my English was very absolutely literal, and everything had to be pronounced well,
so I had problems with the Sheffield accent as well, you know, because they would say things like, ooh, buy gum,
and I'd say, why are they saying things like that, what does buy gum mean, and you know, it's very strange pronunciation if you've never heard it,
because my English was, you know, what I would say, correct English, and that's how we were taught in Uganda,
but it wasn't as, there wasn't the slangs in it, and then we, eight months or so later, nine months or so,
Jennifer Blanchlauer was pregnant with her first son, Sean, and it was going to get difficult with a new baby,
so one of my cousins found us another house, and at that point a lot of Pakistanis would be renting houses out,
so we rented off a Pakistani house, and then that started a trail of multiple house moves being thrown out,
and we moved into an area, Healy Bank Road in Sheffield, which was an awful house, it was so dirty and disgusting,
and mum spent hours and hours and hours cleaning to make it habitable, and then I opened the door to the Pakistani landlord,
because I just didn't really think, and he knocked on the door, and it was the landlord, so you had to open,
and they didn't give me warning in those days that they're coming to visit, and I saw behind him somebody was smiling away,
and I thought that must be his wife, and she was carrying a big pot of food, and I opened the door, and I shouldn't have,
because as soon as they came in they were smiling, but as soon as they came in they barged into the kitchen,
they gathered up all our stuff and just threw it in the street, as in, my wife's come back from Pakistan,
I want the house back, so all our stuff was just in the street, and we just stood there with our suitcases,
because it had all come furnished, we hadn't got any furniture at that point, and so we just stood there,
and then it was a case of, we rang the authorities, or somebody rang for us, and then they took us away,
and we were put into this horrible hotel in town, and it was literally, we were just given one room with one of those cabins showers inside,
and breakfast downstairs, and again it was just toast and sausage and stuff like that for breakfast,
so mum would never go down, because being a devout vegetarian Hindu, it's very difficult to be faced with beef,
and you'll be against the faith and the religion, so I would always, we stayed there a few months,
so I'd take a piece of toast up for her, and my sister and I would go down and have some toast or beans on toast or something,
and that became a staple favourite really. This began like a series of being thrown out of houses, nowhere to go really,
and then we were given another house on Harcourt Street, after we stayed in the hotel for several months,
and then some well-meaning visitors would come, one of the Asian people who'd found out we'd been thrown out of the accommodation,
and would say, you know, oh you're so close to town, I tell you what, Marks and Spencer, it's lovely food there,
if you ever want to eat there, you know, get the food from Marks, it's lovely, and mum and I went down to have a look at,
the three of us went down to look at Marks, and it was so expensive to us, and I said to mum,
gosh it's a lot more pennies than sort of waiting till the end of the day and getting things from the market,
but it was well-meaning, but I don't think people realise what it's like to struggle financially,
and then we moved into Harcourt Road, but there was quite a lot of steep steps to get there,
and mum found that quite difficult, because she wasn't that well, but it was somewhere to go after the hotel,
and then we were just moving and moving and moving, and then eventually we found a house,
we were given a council house on Arnside Terrace, and that was quite nice, because there was a lilac tree on the end,
we were given the end house, and there was a river, like a weir running there, some sort of a factory event,
but some sort of a factory there, but we were given this place, it was just an end of terrace house, two bedroom, two up, two down,
but it felt like heaven, you know, and it was ours, and it was happy, you know, there was like a, because it was the end row, end house,
it was like we'd celebrate with all the others, if they were celebrating any royal events, like Princess Anne getting married,
and it would be really nice to wave a flag and be part of the team, and we stayed there, and we seemed to be happy,
but then I got to 18 and I'd finished my O-levels, A-levels, because mum had always said, meanwhile,
you've got to get an education, I've got nothing to give you, I've got nothing to give you, so that was always a driving force,
and it's really to her credit that we've managed to do what we have, you know, with all the insecurity and instability,
and no self-esteem really, just feeling you're just a worthless piece of dirt, you know, do this, do that,
because that's how the men treat you anyway afterwards, when your daddy's gone,
and I was going off to college because I had a place to start my radiography, and I got that in Lincoln,
so I said to mum, well, you know, we'd never had holidays, everybody else was having holidays,
and it was so glamorous to have a holiday and go on holiday, but we'd never done anything,
the only type of things we'd done was visit the relatives in Leicester or stay, you know, visit them and visit so and so,
but it had never been that getaway time, so my sister and I decided we were going to do this Transalpino train,
and for £40 you could actually go all the way into Italy on a student Transalpino and stop off, jump off,
and stay in a hostel and then go a bit further down, so mum kept saying, I don't want you to go, I don't want you to go,
but I wasn't really an adult enough to actually realise she wasn't going to be able to cope,
and so I said, it's only a month, we'll be back in a month, we'll be back in a month,
anyway, we did our holiday trip and we really enjoyed it, and we came back after the trip,
and mum had gone, she'd left the house, and we managed to get into the house,
but all the furniture and everything had just gone, what we'd managed to buy and put together,
and so we just stayed that night in the house, just sat on the carpet, and we didn't really know what to do, quite honestly,
and we rang Suresh, the same cousin we'd come over with, and he was living in Batemore area in Sheffield,
so we went over to him, and we had such a shock, but what had happened meanwhile was my mum must have been saying to the relatives,
her relatives in Leicester, because obviously looking back as an adult, I don't think anybody would have bothered visiting her really,
and she was isolated on her own, her English wasn't brilliant, and she probably wasn't confident catching a bus either without me there,
because we knew all about the buses, and it was two pence to get on the bus there in Sheffield at that point,
and two pence for this part of the journey, and we would go and catch buses to see the relatives,
and I think what had happened was people in Leicester, which was her side of the family, were probably saying to her,
why are you sat there on your own like that, when they're not even bothering with you,
and just come to Leicester and we'll sort something out, because in Leicester you have got a community,
so mum had given up this lovely house and gone into Leicester, and they had found a rental place from another rogue landlord in Garfield Street,
which was like in Leicester, which was all sort of, the wall partitions were literally cardboard, and that was the wall, and it was absolutely awful,
and we stayed with Suresh, my cousin, then in Sheffield, not knowing what to do, and then his wife, Madhu, said,
well you're going off, aren't you, soon to study radiography in Lincoln, so you stay and you can go straight from here to do your radiography.
She turned to my sister and said, well you go to your mum then, because you can't both stay here, so that's what happened.
My sister went to Garfield Street, and again we were back into quite a depressing time then,
which was an awful, awful, again, row of terrace houses, and then the landlord would be saying,
this is what's said on the rent book, but then you give me extras, and that's behind the scenes then, and you don't tell anybody,
and that's what happened, but then meanwhile with all the stress of the move, probably mum had a stroke,
so obviously I was back and forth, from then I would do a lot of travelling from Lincoln to Lincoln to see mum in Leicester,
and then eventually after a long while she got housed into, the council found her another house, which was actually quite nice,
on Payne Street, it was up the road, but it was a nicely maintained little house, again two up, two down,
and they put a downstairs bathroom for her, because she was having difficulty climbing stairs,
and there she stayed for the rest of her life quite happy, because her sister was literally half hour, 20 minutes walk away,
and she could walk to her sister's, and she loved walking, or she could walk on Belgrave Road,
which was the main shopping street there with all the Asian foods available, the sari shops and whatever,
and she actually became really happy and settled, which was the best thing,
and I wish we'd gone to Leicester straight away, then we wouldn't have had all that trauma,
I think it would have been the best thing to have done, then I graduated in my radiography,
then I went to work in, I did some work in Derby Royal Infirmary, then I went to work in Nottingham General Hospital,
and then I saw an opportunity, because jobs were quite rare in those days, and I got locum jobs,
but there was no security in Derby Royal Hospital, because it was all to do with funding and money,
and then I got a chance to have a senior position in Wales, in Swansea,
and they wanted my two qualifications I had in radiography, therapy and diagnostic to set up this service,
and within a few years of graduating I got a senior position, if I was prepared to move,
and mum really didn't want me to go, and she was meanwhile trying to arrange a marriage for me,
and again, because she was old school, she would try and arrange the marriage,
and people would, people are, oh he's coming to look at you, without even asking me or discussing with me,
because in her days, you know, a parent doesn't have to discuss with a child, a child does as they're told,
and I was feeling really uncomfortable with that, and I think a lot of that was due to what I had seen,
the underhand behaviour, with what is said on the face, on the front, and then what actually is done behind the scenes,
and I had suffered assaults really, and even from the family that, one person in the family that we were close to,
so I wasn't really that open to that idea, and also the fact that I did actually meet one nice accountant,
and I thought he would be a possibility, but then he literally wanted the answer within days,
and I just felt really uncomfortable with that, and I just felt I really don't know you, can we meet,
and mum was like, no, no, no, you don't have to get to know someone, you can get to know them after you're married,
and there's nothing to discuss if the cast is right, and he also came from that sort of a background,
and he was like, I'd prefer an answer today rather than tomorrow, and I just thought I just can't deal with this,
so I said no, and I was just beginning to, I do have problems with trusting men actually, full stop,
I have a lot of difficulty in those sorts of situations, and I just really felt uncomfortable with being pressurised all the time,
and the other thing that had happened a lot is the fact that things were being arranged without me actually having a chance
to have any chance of a discussion or a debate, and then I came to Wales, and I was literally doing well in the job,
enjoying the job, and I got to know my current husband slowly, quite well really over the years,
he was just a friend for many, many years, but we were just good friends, and we said,
well the first house you like, you can buy, and it was nice to go with somebody, just a house hunt,
and I said the second house we like, you know, I can buy, but we both give each other our opinions,
so that's what actually happened, and that's what we did, so he had a house, and I had a house.